Docker is a set of products that uses operating-system-level virtualization to deliver software in packages called containers . Docker automates the deployment of applications within lightweight containers, enabling them to run consistently across different computing environments.
The core software that runs and manages these containers is called Docker Engine . Docker was first released in 2013 and continues to be developed by Docker, Inc. The platform includes both free and paid tiers.
Solomon Hykes [ fr ] started the Docker project in France as an internal project within dotCloud , a platform-as-a-service company.
dotCloud Inc. was founded by Kamel Founadi, Hykes, and Sebastien Pahl during the Y Combinator Summer 2010 startup incubator group and launched in 2011, and renamed to Docker Inc in 2013.
Docker debuted to the public in Santa Clara at PyCon in 2013. It was released as open-source in March 2013. At the time, it used LXC as its default execution environment. One year later, with the release of version 0.9, Docker replaced LXC with its own component, libcontainer , which was written in the Go programming language.
In 2017, Docker created the Moby project [ wd ] for open research and development.
Containers are isolated from one another and bundle their own software, libraries and configuration files; they can communicate with each other through well-defined channels. Because all of the containers share the services of a single operating system kernel , they use fewer resources than virtual machines .
Docker can package an application and its dependencies in a virtual container that can, in principle, run on any Linux , Windows , or macOS computer. This enables the application to run in a variety of locations, such as on-premises , in public (see decentralized computing , distributed computing , and cloud computing ) or private cloud . When running on Linux, Docker uses the resource isolation features of the Linux kernel (such as cgroups and kernel namespaces ) and a union-capable file system (such as OverlayFS ) to allow containers to run within a single Linux instance, avoiding the overhead of starting and maintaining virtual machines . Docker on macOS uses a Linux virtual machine to run the containers.
Because Docker containers are lightweight , a single server or virtual machine can run several containers simultaneously. A 2018 analysis found that a typical Docker use case involves running eight containers per host, and that a quarter of analyzed organizations run 18 or more per host. It can also be installed on a single board computer like the Raspberry Pi .
The Linux kernel's support for namespaces mostly isolates an application's view of the operating environment, including process trees, network, user IDs and mounted file systems, while the kernel's cgroups provide resource limiting for memory and CPU. Since version 0.9, Docker includes its own component (called libcontainer ) to use virtualization facilities provided directly by the Linux kernel, in addition to using abstracted virtualization interfaces via libvirt , LXC and systemd-nspawn .
Docker implements a high-level API to provide lightweight containers that run processes in isolation.
The Docker software as a service offering consists of three components:
A Dockerfile is a text file that commonly specifies several aspects of a Docker container: the Linux distribution , installation commands for the programming language runtime environment and application source code.
Docker Compose is a tool for defining and running multi-container Docker applications. It uses YAML files to configure the application's services and performs the creation and start-up process of all the containers with a single command. The docker compose CLI utility allows users to run commands on multiple containers at once; for example, building images, scaling containers, running containers that were stopped, and more. Commands related to image manipulation, or user-interactive options, are not relevant in Docker Compose because they address one container. The docker-compose.yml file is used to define an application's services and includes various configuration options. For example, the build option defines configuration options such as the Dockerfile path, the command option allows one to override default Docker commands, and more. The first public beta version of Docker Compose (version 0.0.1) was released on December 21, 2013. The first production-ready version (1.0) was made available on October 16, 2014.
Docker Swarm provides native clustering functionality for Docker containers, which turns a group of Docker engines into a single virtual Docker engine. In Docker 1.12 and higher, Swarm mode is integrated with Docker Engine. The docker swarm CLI utility allows users to run Swarm containers, create discovery tokens, list nodes in the cluster, and more. The docker node CLI utility allows users to run various commands to manage nodes in a swarm, for example, listing the nodes in a swarm, updating nodes, and removing nodes from the swarm. Docker manages swarms using the Raft consensus algorithm. According to Raft, for an update to be performed, the majority of Swarm nodes need to agree on the update. In addition to the docker swarm CLI, docker stack is a tool designed to manage Swarm services with greater flexibility. It can use a configuration file very similar to a docker-compose.yml , with a few nuances. Using docker stack instead of docker compose offers several advantages, such as the ability to manage a Swarm cluster across multiple machines or the capability to work with docker secret combined with docker context , a feature that allows executing Docker commands on a remote host, enabling remote container management.
Docker Volume facilitates the independent persistence of data, allowing data to remain even after the container is deleted or re-created.